paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: Visualization of Multi-Dimensional Data -- The data-slicer Package
bibliography: paper.bib
tags:
  - Python
  - visualization
authors:
  - name: Kevin Kramer
    orcid: 0000-0001-5523-6924
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Johan Chang
    orcid: 0000-0002-4655-1516
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Physik Institut, Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland
    index: 1
date: 25 February 2021
---

# Statement of Need
\label{sec:intro}

From prehistoric cave-wall paintings to the invention of print and most 
recently electronic hard-disks, human data storage capacity has evolved 
tremendously.
Information/data is of great value and hence associated with innovation and 
technological progress.
This is especially true in analytical disciplines i.e. all sciences ranging 
from physics to psychology and medicine.
In observational sciences, most measurement techniques undergo steady 
improvements in acquisition time and resolution.
As a result the sheer data throughput is continually increasing.
Examples of techniques where the typical data output has moved from 1D to 3D 
in the past few decades are shown in \autoref{fig1}.

More data is always welcome.
However, in many disciplines human digestion of these large amounts of data 
has now become the bottleneck.
In many fields, for example those working at large scale synchrotron 
facilities where the duration of the experiment is limited, scientists 
require a means of quick data inspection and carrying out a fast preliminary 
analysis in order to take decisions on the course of the experiment.
Many of the existing powerful and versatile visualization tools 
[@fedorov123d;@ahrens05paraview;@00mayavi;@00visit] are not well suited for 
this purpose and cannot easily support the specific and often changing needs 
of a given discipline.
The result is that each community ends up developing their own solutions to 
the problem of quick data visualization and inspection, e.g.
[@stansbury20pyarpes;@lass20mjolnir].
However, since these implementations are usually intertwined and 
entangled with the community-specific parts, such solutions are typically 
not transferrable across different disciplines or experimental methodologies.

We have developed PIT and the data-slicer package to account 
for these needs: offering tools for fast live visualization of data at an 
general scope that can easily be adjusted and fine tuned for more 
specific problems.

![Evolution of data acquisition in the field of spectroscopy. 
(a,b) Angle resolved photoemission electron spectroscopy (ARPES) 
[@shai13quasiparticle; @wells92evidence], 
(c,d) tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) [@zhang19machine; @giaever62tunneling], 
and (e,f) inelastic neutron scattering (INS) 
[@Wan_2020; @Bastien; @woods60lattice] spectroscopy 
techniques all started with single spectrum collection (top row).
Modern spectroscopic and scattering techniques, however, involve 
multidimensional data acquisition (bottom row).
  \label{fig1}
](fig1.pdf)

# Summary

data-slicer is a python package that contains several functions and classes 
which provide modular Qt [@company00qt; @00riverbank] widgets, tools and 
utilities for the visualization of three-dimensional (3D) datasets.
These building blocks can be combined freely to create new applications.
Some of these building blocks are used within the package to form a 
graphical user interface (GUI) for 3D data visualization and manipulation: 
the Python Image Tool (PIT).
The relation between different elements of the package and external software 
is schematically depicted in \autoref{fig2}.

## PIT
PIT consists of a number of dynamic plot figures which allow browsing through 
3D data by quickly selecting slices of variable thickness from the data cube 
and further cutting them up arbitrarily.
Two core features of PIT should be explicitly mentioned.
The first is the ability to create slices of the 3D data cube along arbitrary 
angles quickly.
This is facilitated on the GUI side through a simple draggable line to select 
the slice direction.
The superior speed of this operation is enabled by the use of optimized 
functions.
The second feature worth mentioning is the inclusion of an ipython console 
which is aware of the loaded data as well as of all GUI elements.
The console immediately enables users to run any analysis routine suitable to 
their respective needs.
This includes running python commands in a workflow familiar to pylab or 
Jupyter [@00jupyter] notebook users but also loading or directly running 
scripts into or from the console, using ipython's line magic functions 
\texttt{\%load} and \texttt{\%run} respectively.
Effectively, this design is central in empowering users to accomplish any task
imaginable --- as long as it is possible to achieve with python.

## Plugins
It is clear that it can get complicated and tedious to run certain types of 
data processing or analysis from the ipython console, as described in the 
previous paragraph.
For such cases, PIT provides an additional level of customizability and 
control through its plugin system.
Plugins are regular python packages that can be loaded from within PIT and 
enhance it with new functionality.
A plugin can interact with all elements in PIT via the same interfaces as can 
be done through the built-in ipython console.
Creating a plugin therefore requires little programming skills and no further 
knowledge of the inner workings of PIT.
In this manner, different communities of users can create and share their 
field-specific plugins which allow them to customize PIT to their needs.

As an example, we mention the ds-arpes-plugin [@arpesPlugin], which provides 
basic functionalities for loading of ARPES datasets and handles for typical 
analysis functions, customized and taylored to be used from within PIT.

## Modularity and widgets

PIT is constructed in a modular fashion, constituting of different widgets 
that have been combined together to make a useful, ready to use tool.
However, different applications may require slightly different 
functionalities, and the setup in PIT may not be optimal.
The data-slicer package makes all the used widgets in PIT and some additional ones 
independently available to the user.
These widgets can be arbitrarily combined to create customized applications 
in a relatively simple manner.

In summary, the data-slicer package solves the problem of offering the right 
scope -- neither too specialized that it can only be used by a narrow community 
nor too bloated such that it becomes hard to do specific operations -- by 
offering a variety of methods for users of varying backgrounds to get exactly 
the tools they need.
On the first and most general level, PIT offers a ready-to-use GUI for quick 
3D data visualization without any need of programmatic user input.
Users can satisfy their more specific needs either through use of the console 
or by implementing a plugin, which can both be accomplished with little 
programming knowledge.
On the last, most specific level users can use and arrange the building 
blocks contained in the package to create completely new applications or 
embed PIT or other parts of the data-slicer package into an existing application.

![Schematic structural overview of the data-slicer package (represented by 
the large grey block). 
The python image tool (PIT) is made up of different modular building blocks. 
These blocks can be used to create or enhance new applications.
PIT itself can be used directly, optionally augmented through plugins.
Alternatively, it can be embedded in external applications.
\label{fig2}
](fig2.pdf)

# Acknowledgements

We are thankful for fruitful discussions with and inputs from Titus Neupert, 
Claude Monney, Daniel Mazzone, Nicholas Plumb, Wojciech Pude\l{}ko, Niels 
Bech Christensen as well as for the testing efforts of Qisi Wang, Julia 
Küspert and Karin von Arx.

Kevin Kramer and Johan Chang acknowledge support by the Swiss National 
Science Foundation.

# References

Commit message:

Added references to matplotlib, numpy and pyqtgraph, fixing #11

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: Visualization of Multi-Dimensional Data -- The data-slicer Package
bibliography: paper.bib
tags:
  - Python
  - visualization
authors:
  - name: Kevin Kramer
    orcid: 0000-0001-5523-6924
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Johan Chang
    orcid: 0000-0002-4655-1516
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Physik Institut, Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland
    index: 1
date: 25 February 2021
---

# Statement of Need
\label{sec:intro}

From prehistoric cave-wall paintings to the invention of print and most 
recently electronic hard-disks, human data storage capacity has evolved 
tremendously.
Information/data is of great value and hence associated with innovation and 
technological progress.
This is especially true in analytical disciplines i.e. all sciences ranging 
from physics to psychology and medicine.
In observational sciences, most measurement techniques undergo steady 
improvements in acquisition time and resolution.
As a result the sheer data throughput is continually increasing.
Examples of techniques where the typical data output has moved from 1D to 3D 
in the past few decades are shown in \autoref{fig1}.

More data is always welcome.
However, in many disciplines human digestion of these large amounts of data 
has now become the bottleneck.
In many fields, for example those working at large scale synchrotron 
facilities where the duration of the experiment is limited, scientists 
require a means of quick data inspection and carrying out a fast preliminary 
analysis in order to take decisions on the course of the experiment.
Many of the existing powerful and versatile visualization tools 
[@fedorov123d;@ahrens05paraview;@00mayavi;@00visit] are not well suited for 
this purpose and cannot easily support the specific and often changing needs 
of a given discipline.
The result is that each community ends up developing their own solutions to 
the problem of quick data visualization and inspection, e.g.
[@stansbury20pyarpes;@lass20mjolnir].
However, since these implementations are usually intertwined and 
entangled with the community-specific parts, such solutions are typically 
not transferrable across different disciplines or experimental methodologies.

We have developed PIT and the data-slicer package to account 
for these needs: offering tools for fast live visualization of data at an 
general scope that can easily be adjusted and fine tuned for more 
specific problems.

![Evolution of data acquisition in the field of spectroscopy. 
(a,b) Angle resolved photoemission electron spectroscopy (ARPES) 
[@shai13quasiparticle; @wells92evidence], 
(c,d) tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) [@zhang19machine; @giaever62tunneling], 
and (e,f) inelastic neutron scattering (INS) 
[@Wan_2020; @Bastien; @woods60lattice] spectroscopy 
techniques all started with single spectrum collection (top row).
Modern spectroscopic and scattering techniques, however, involve 
multidimensional data acquisition (bottom row).
  \label{fig1}
](fig1.pdf)

# Summary

data-slicer is a python package that contains several functions and classes 
which provide modular Qt [@company00qt; @00riverbank] widgets, tools and 
utilities for the visualization of three-dimensional (3D) datasets.
These building blocks can be combined freely to create new applications.
Some of these building blocks are used within the package to form a 
graphical user interface (GUI) for 3D data visualization and manipulation: 
the Python Image Tool (PIT).
The relation between different elements of the package and external software 
is schematically depicted in \autoref{fig2}.

## PIT
PIT consists of a number of dynamic plot figures which allow browsing through 
3D data by quickly selecting slices of variable thickness from the data cube 
and further cutting them up arbitrarily.
Two core features of PIT should be explicitly mentioned.
The first is the ability to create slices of the 3D data cube along arbitrary 
angles quickly.
This is facilitated on the GUI side through a simple draggable line to select 
the slice direction.
The superior speed of this operation is enabled by the use of optimized 
functions.
The second feature worth mentioning is the inclusion of an ipython console 
which is aware of the loaded data as well as of all GUI elements.
The console immediately enables users to run any analysis routine suitable to 
their respective needs.
This includes running python commands in a workflow familiar to pylab or 
Jupyter [@00jupyter] notebook users but also loading or directly running 
scripts into or from the console, using ipython's line magic functions 
\texttt{\%load} and \texttt{\%run} respectively.
Effectively, this design is central in empowering users to accomplish any task
imaginable --- as long as it is possible to achieve with python.

## Plugins
It is clear that it can get complicated and tedious to run certain types of 
data processing or analysis from the ipython console, as described in the 
previous paragraph.
For such cases, PIT provides an additional level of customizability and 
control through its plugin system.
Plugins are regular python packages that can be loaded from within PIT and 
enhance it with new functionality.
A plugin can interact with all elements in PIT via the same interfaces as can 
be done through the built-in ipython console.
Creating a plugin therefore requires little programming skills and no further 
knowledge of the inner workings of PIT.
In this manner, different communities of users can create and share their 
field-specific plugins which allow them to customize PIT to their needs.

As an example, we mention the ds-arpes-plugin [@arpesPlugin], which provides 
basic functionalities for loading of ARPES datasets and handles for typical 
analysis functions, customized and taylored to be used from within PIT.

## Modularity and widgets

PIT is constructed in a modular fashion, constituting of different widgets 
that have been combined together to make a useful, ready to use tool.
However, different applications may require slightly different 
functionalities, and the setup in PIT may not be optimal.
The data-slicer package makes all the used widgets in PIT and some additional ones 
independently available to the user.
These widgets can be arbitrarily combined to create customized applications 
in a relatively simple manner.

In summary, the data-slicer package solves the problem of offering the right 
scope -- neither too specialized that it can only be used by a narrow community 
nor too bloated such that it becomes hard to do specific operations -- by 
offering a variety of methods for users of varying backgrounds to get exactly 
the tools they need.
On the first and most general level, PIT offers a ready-to-use GUI for quick 
3D data visualization without any need of programmatic user input.
Users can satisfy their more specific needs either through use of the console 
or by implementing a plugin, which can both be accomplished with little 
programming knowledge.
On the last, most specific level users can use and arrange the building 
blocks contained in the package to create completely new applications or 
embed PIT or other parts of the data-slicer package into an existing application.

![Schematic structural overview of the data-slicer package (represented by 
the large grey block). 
The python image tool (PIT) is made up of different modular building blocks. 
These blocks can be used to create or enhance new applications.
PIT itself can be used directly, optionally augmented through plugins.
Alternatively, it can be embedded in external applications.
\label{fig2}
](fig2.pdf)

# Acknowledgements

We are thankful for fruitful discussions with and inputs from Titus Neupert, 
Claude Monney, Daniel Mazzone, Nicholas Plumb, Wojciech Pude\l{}ko, Niels 
Bech Christensen as well as for the testing efforts of Qisi Wang, Julia 
Küspert and Karin von Arx.
We acknowledge the contribution of other open-source frameworks to this 
publication, namely matplotlib [@hunter07matplotlib], numpy 
[@harris20array] and pyqtgraph [@00pyqtgraph].
Kevin Kramer and Johan Chang acknowledge support by the Swiss National 
Science Foundation.


# References
